T cell exhaustion, a state of reduced proliferative potential and cytokine production and increased expression of inhibitory receptors, results from chronic stimulation from antigens that are unabled to be fully cleared.
In recent type 1 diabetes (T1D) studies, levels of TIGIT<sup>+</sup>KLRG1<sup>+</sup> (henceforth double positive, DP) CD8s early after treatment have correlated with better response to therapy.
Specifically, DP PD-1<sup>+</sup> and DP CD57<sup>+</sup> exhausted CD8s have been shown to be associated with improved response to therapy and slower progression to disease, consistent with the reduced effector function of these exhausted T cells.
However, DP CD127<sup>+</sup> exhausted CD8s may actually associate with worse outcome in T1D, displaying a heterogeneity in association with response to therapy amongst DP exhausted CD8s.
To investigate this heterogeneity and given the epigenetic changes that characterize T cell exhaustion, here we profiled the epigenetic states of different non-naive DP CD8 populations from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of 10 T1D patients treated with teplizumab, a humanized anti-CD3 mAb that delays progression to T1D, using bulk ATAC-seq.
We found that the epigenetic states of DP CD127<sup>+</sup> CD8s were intermediate to that of other DP CD8s (PD-1<sup>+</sup> and CD57<sup>+</sup>) and TIGIT<sup>-</sup>KLRG1<sup>-</sup> CD8s.
Given our interest in the relationships between these cell sorts, we also analyzed mitochondrial-mapping ATAC-seq reads and found that the DP CD57<sup>+</sup> CD8s had more mitochondrial single nucleotide variants than the other non-naive CD8s, suggesting that they were more terminal in their differentiation.
Given these data, we hypothesize that a bifurcation occurs in non-naive CD8 lineage differentiation where one branch leads to the DP CD127<sup>+</sup> CD8s and the other branch leads to the other DP CD8s (PD-1<sup>+</sup> and the more terminal, downstream CD57<sup>+</sup>).
This separation of DP CD127<sup>+</sup> CD8s from other DP CD8s is consistent with the observed heterogeneity in association with response to therapy and bodes well for new trials combining teplizumab and anti-IL7R.